Building an API pt. 6 - lesson 2 (Update create_app & create test DB) updates (#158)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2: api-6-testing/setting-configs-and-creating-the-test-db.md

# Setting Configurations & Creating the Test Database

<!-- FLASK UPDATE -->
<!-- <iframe src="https://adaacademy.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=57fb6d03-b718-4f99-9d37-ad1d0158d396&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=false&start=0&interactivity=all" height="405" width="720" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe> -->

## Goals

Our goals for this lesson are to:

- Refactor our `create_app` function to read from a `.env` file and accept configuration settings
- Create the test database for `hello-books-api`

We will complete the following steps:

1. Create a `.env` file
2. Prevent our `.env` from being committed by using a `.gitignore` file
3. Create environment variables in our `.env` file:
   - URL for a development database
   - URL for a test database

> 4. Create a test database with the matching name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Create a test database with the name that matches the one provided to our `.env` file
```

What do you think about specifying what the matching name is?

Author: I like being clear about the names matching, what do you think about:

```suggestion
4. Create a test database whose name matches the one provided in our `.env` file 
```

Reviewer: Sounds good to me!

5. Refactor our `create_app` method to:
   1. Check for a configuration dictionary

>    2. Read the correct database location from `.env`

Reviewer: Did you mean to have these sub bullet points numbered or have them as circles like on line 18 & 19?

I realize that I might be making comments on content that aren't your changes.

Author: These actions have to happen in this order, so I think numbers are more fitting than bullets in this case.

6. Manually test that our development environment still works

These actions will allow us to set up testing for our API, which in turn will help us create higher quality software.

## Branches

| Starting Branch    | Ending Branch       |
| ------------------ | ------------------- |
| `05a-query-params` | `06a-test-database` |

<details>
   <summary>Expand to see the features <code>Hello Books API</code> should have before this lesson</summary>

- A `hello_books_development` database
- A `book` table defined
- A `Book` model defined
- `POST` `/books` route defined
- `GET` `/books` route defined
- `GET` `/books/<book_id>` route defined
- `PUT` `/books/<book_id>` route defined
- `DELETE` `/books/<book_id>` route defined
- Invalid <code>book_id</code> and non-existing `book`s handled with `validate_book` helper function

</details>
<br>

## Create Our `.env` File

It is a common practice to name our environment files `.env` and place them in the root directory. Later in this series we will be using a tool that requires this exact set up, so we should create the `.env` file in our project root either in our code editor, or by running

```bash
$ touch .env
```

> in the project root directory.

Reviewer: The way the words flow in the browser look kind of choppy to me. 
<img width="818" alt="image" src="https://github.com/Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-2/assets/20671802/a38fa14c-537d-421c-8e73-becabaceda92">

How would you feel about changing it like:

or by running the following command:
```bash
$ touch .env
```

## Make Git Ignore Our `.env` File

Git is great at tracking our files. But there are some files we don't want Git to track!

We are going to be putting potentially sensitive information into our `.env` file, so we need to tell Git to lay off!

We use a `.gitignore` file to tell Git what to ignore.

### `.gitignore`

The `.gitignore` file contains a list of files and folders that Git will _automatically never track_.

Every file and folder listed in `.gitignore` will remain _untracked_ by Git. This helps our workflow, as it gives us the confidence that we'll never accidentally commit a file listed in `.gitignore` to our Git history.

### Adding `.env` to `.gitignore`

To make Git ignore our `.env` file, we open `.gitignore` in our text editor and add `.env` to the file on its own line.

In the case that we already have contents in our `.gitignore` file, we can confirm whether `.env` is listed by searching the file. `.env` only needs to be listed once.

## Populate the Environment Variables

> `.env` files are made of lines of the form:

Reviewer: How do you feel about rewording this sentence like:

`.env` files have the following format:

> `.env` files are made of lines of the form:

Author: ```suggestion
`.env` files typically use the following format:
```

```bash
VARIABLE_NAME=variable value
```

| <div style="min-width:175px;"> Piece of Code </div> | Notes |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ----- |

> | `VARIABLE_NAME`                                     | Name of the environment variable to set. Replace `VARIABLE_NAME` with a good name for our environment variable. It's conventional to name environment variables with CAPITAL_CASING, just like constant variables. |

Reviewer: what about changing "good name" to "descriptive name"

> | `VARIABLE_NAME`                                     | Name of the environment variable to set. Replace `VARIABLE_NAME` with a good name for our environment variable. It's conventional to name environment variables with CAPITAL_CASING, just like constant variables. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `VARIABLE_NAME`                                     | Name of the environment variable to set. Replace `VARIABLE_NAME` with a descriptive name for our environment variable. It's conventional to name environment variables with CAPITAL_CASING, just like constant variables. |
```

| `=`                                                 | The environment variable name is separated from its value with `=`. We usually _don't_ surround it with spaces. |
| `variable value`                                    | The value for our environment variable. Surrounding quotes are optional in general, but may be required if we need our value to begin with spaces, since spaces immediately following the `=` are ignored. |

> Beyond those guidelines, we are free to choose the best variable names and values for our project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond those guidelines, we are free to choose variable names and values that are best suited for our project.
```

> For our Hello Books API, we want to designate a path to a development database and a testing database with the variables named `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI` and `SQLALCHEMY_TEST_DATABASE_URI`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our Hello Books API, we want to designate separate paths to a development database and a testing database with the variables named `SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI` and `SQLALCHEMY_TEST_DATABASE_URI`.
```

What do you think of this to add clarity that there are two different paths that can be taken.
